---
title: Catch2 vs Google Test
tags: c++ tdd catch2 clion
---
I've moved all my tests for the
[Vulkan sprite renderer](https://github.com/snorristurluson/vulkan-sprites)
from [Google Test](https://github.com/google/googletest) 
to [Catch2](https://github.com/catchorg/Catch2)

There are two main reasons why I like Catch2 over Google Test - the fact that it's a
header only library, and the way test cases with sections make fixtures unnecessary.

## Header only
Using Catch2 is ridiculously easy - I download one header file, stick it in my *extern*
folder and include it.

The setup I had with Google Test wasn't bad - I had a *CMakeLists-googletest.txt.in* file
that I included in my main *CMakeLists.txt* file that pulled Google Test down from the
GitHub repo and built it, meaning I didn't need to explicitly install it beforehand.
I used this approach in an 
[earlier project](https://github.com/snorristurluson/exsim-physics)
based off [this blog post](https://crascit.com/2015/07/25/cmake-gtest/).

I had set up a 
[Travis job](https://travis-ci.org/snorristurluson/exsim-physics/builds#)
for testing, and pulling in the dependencies this way made it
easier to build the project on any machine - the build process itself knows how to get
what it needs.

So, for the Vulkan sprites I just copied this setup and all was good. It worked on my
Ubuntu desktop, then I cloned the project over to my MacBook Pro and it all worked fine
there as well. Until, at some point I was working without an Internet connection (I was
on an airplane) and CMake decided it needed to talk to GitHub.

With Catch2, needless to say, with only one header that I've now added to my project, it 
all just works with no CMake voodoo.

## No fixtures
My renderer needs a window to initialize with, so for Google Test I had set up a fixture
(see [my previous blog](../TestDrivenVulkan)) for creating and destroying that window
for each test.

Catch2 uses a different approach, allowing you to split test cases into sections. For each
section the test case is executed from the start, so any code you have before the first
section can do whatever setup you have that is common - inline with all your test code
rather than being in a separate fixture class.

```cpp
TEST_CASE("Renderer") {
    glfwInit();
    glfwWindowHint(GLFW_CLIENT_API, GLFW_NO_API);
    auto window = glfwCreateWindow(800, 600, "TextureAtlasTest", nullptr, nullptr);

    SECTION("Initialize") {
        SECTION("without validation") {
            Renderer r;
            r.Initialize(window, Renderer::DISABLE_VALIDATION);
            REQUIRE(r.IsInitialized());
            REQUIRE(!r.GetDebugMessenger());
        }

        SECTION("with validation") {
            Renderer r;
            r.Initialize(window, Renderer::ENABLE_VALIDATION);
            REQUIRE(r.IsInitialized());
            REQUIRE(r.GetDebugMessenger());
            REQUIRE(r.GetDebugMessenger()->GetErrorAndWarningCount() == 0);
        }

        SECTION("multiple calls throw") {
            Renderer r;
            r.Initialize(window, Renderer::ENABLE_VALIDATION);
            REQUIRE_THROWS_AS(r.Initialize(window, Renderer::ENABLE_VALIDATION), std::runtime_error);
        }
    }
    ...
}
``` 
Sections can be nested, and I generally set up a test case per class, with a section
per method and a sub-section per test I need to do on that method.

## Other niceties
I like the simplicity of the *REQUIRE* macro, just relying on natural C++ syntax
for conditions.

My development environment of choice these days is
[CLion](https://www.jetbrains.com/clion/). It has very good support for both Google Test
and Catch2, but I find it easier to make the test report within CLion to be more
descriptive. With Google Test the test name has to be a valid C++ identifier, whereas
Catch2 allows you to use a regular string.

## But...
There's always a but, right? I have found one drawback, in that I can't seem to able to
set breakpoints in tests. Sometimes when tests fail it's nice to be able to set a breakpoint
in the failing test, run the suite again under the debugger and step through code. For
some reason that isn't working for me with Catch2, the way it did with Google Test.

It's not a showstopper for me - with granular unit tests the need for a debugger is
reduced, and I can still set breakpoints in the code being tested. Rather than running
the suite again with a breakpoint in the failing test, I can set breakpoints in the code
under test and only run the failing test.

## Finally
I'm happy with making the switch, and look forward to writing more tests with Catch2.
I find the tests to be more readable, and the test report within CLion to be more
descriptive.

That said, this is a small project that only had about 70 tests. For a larger project
with any significant number of tests it might be hard to justify switching as Google
Test does the job quite nicely.

[This blog post](https://anteru.net/blog/2017/from-google-test-to-catch/index.html)
describes the author's process of porting his tests in a semi-automated fashion.

When converting tests is not an issue I'd highly recommend Catch2 over Google Test.
